[serve] Document multi-app support (#33496)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/multi-app.md

# Deploying Multiple Serve Applications

In Ray 2.4+, deploying multiple independent Serve applications is supported. This user guide will walk you through how to generate a multi-application config file and deploy it using the Serve CLI, and monitor your applications using the CLI and the Ray Serve dashboard.

## Get Started

Define a Serve application:
```{literalinclude} doc_code/basic_calculator.py
:language: python
```

> Copy this to a file `calculator.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy this to a file called `calculator.py`.
```

Define a second Serve application:
```{literalinclude} doc_code/basic_greet.py
:language: python
```

> Copy this to a file `greet.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy this to a file called `greet.py`.
```

Generate a multi-application config file that contains both of these two applications and save it to `config.yaml`.

```
serve build --multi-app calculator:app greet:app -o config.yaml
```

> This should generate the following config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This generates the following config:
```

```yaml
proxy_location: EveryNode
http_options:
  host: 0.0.0.0
  port: 8000

applications:

- name: app1
  route_prefix: /calculator
  import_path: calculator:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: Multiplier
  - name: Adder
  - name: Router
  - name: DAGDriver

- name: app2
  route_prefix: /greet
  import_path: greet:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: greet
  - name: DAGDriver
```

:::{note} 

> The names for each application are auto-generated as `app1`, `app2`, etc. If you want to give custom names for the applications, modify the config file before moving on to the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The names for each application are auto-generated as `app1`, `app2`, etc. To give custom names to the applications, modify the config file before moving on to the next step.
```

:::

> ### Deploy it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the Application
```

> Now let's deploy the applications. Make sure to start a Ray cluster first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy the applications, be sure to start a Ray cluster first.
```

```console
$ ray start --head

$ serve deploy config.yaml
> Sent deploy request successfully!
```

> Query the applications at their respective endpoints `/calculator` and `/greet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Query the applications at their respective endpoints, `/calculator` and `/greet`.
```

```pycon
>>> requests.post("http://localhost:8000/calculator", json=["ADD", 5]).json()
7

>>> requests.post("http://localhost:8000/greet", json="Bob").json()
'Good morning Bob!'
```

> ### Check the status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check Status
```

> You can check the status of the applications by running `serve status`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the status of applications by running `serve status`.
```

```console
$ serve status
name: app1
app_status:
  status: RUNNING
  message: ''
  deployment_timestamp: 1679969226.923282
deployment_statuses:
- name: app1_Multiplier
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''
- name: app1_Adder
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''
- name: app1_Router
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''
- name: app1_DAGDriver
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''

---

name: app2
app_status:
  status: RUNNING
  message: ''
  deployment_timestamp: 1679969226.923282
deployment_statuses:
- name: app2_greet
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''
- name: app2_DAGDriver
  status: HEALTHY
  message: ''
```

:::{note} 

> Notice that in the output of `serve status`, each deployment name has the application name as a prefix. At runtime, all deployments will have the application to which they belong prepended to their names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the output of `serve status`, the prefix of each deployment name is the application name. At runtime, the deployment names are prepended with their corresponding application name.
```

:::

> ## Inspecting Deeper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inspect Deeper
```

If you want more visibility into the applications running on the cluster, go to the Ray Serve dashboard at [`http://localhost:8265/#/serve`](http://localhost:8265/#/serve).

### Serve Overview
The top level view shows cluster-level information about Serve:

![serve-overview](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/system-level-options-dashboard.png)

> As well as all applications that are deployed on the Ray cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also shows all applications that are deployed on the Ray cluster:
```

![applications](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/applications-dashboard.png)

### Application and its deployments

> Click into the first application, `app1`. You will see an overview of the application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click into the first application, `app1` to see an overview of the application:
```

![application-overview](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/application-overview-dashboard.png)

> As well as the list of deployments under that application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also shows the list of deployments under that application:
```

![deploymentsd](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/deployments-dashboard.png)

### Replicas

> Click the drop down arrow for the first deployment, `Adder`. You will see the list of replicas for that deployment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click the drop down arrow for the first deployment, `Adder` to see the list of replicas for that deployment:
```

![replicas](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/replica-dashboard.png)

> Clicking into one of those replicas will then show you an overview of the replica as well as a list of actor tasks run on the replica actor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click into one of the replicas to see an overview of the replica as well as a list of actor tasks running on the replica actor:
```

![replica-overview](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/images/master/docs/serve/multi-app/replica-overview-dashboard.png)

## New Multi-Application Config

> Let's use the config in the tutorial above as an example. In a multi-application config, the first section is cluster-level config options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the config from the above tutorial as an example. In a multi-application config, the first section is for cluster-level config options:
```

```yaml
proxy_location: EveryNode
http_options:
  host: 0.0.0.0
  port: 8000
```

> Then, there is a list of applications to deploy to the Ray cluster. Each application must have a unique name and route prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the list of applications to deploy to the Ray cluster. Each application must have a unique name and route prefix.
```

```yaml
applications:

- name: app1
  route_prefix: /calculator
  import_path: calculator:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: Multiplier
  - name: Adder
  - name: Router
  - name: DAGDriver

- name: app2
  route_prefix: /greet
  import_path: greet:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: greet
  - name: DAGDriver
```

(serve-config-migration)=

> ### Migrating from Single-Application Config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating from a Single-Application Config
```

The multi-application config format `ServeDeploySchema` is easy to migrate to from the single-application config `ServeApplicationSchema`. Each entry under the  `applications` field matches the old, single-application config format. So, to convert an old config to the new config format:
* Copy the entire old config to an entry under the `applications` field.

> * Remove `host` and `port` from the entry and move it under the `http_options` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove `host` and `port` from the entry and move them under the `http_options` field.
```

* Name the application.

> * If you haven't already, set the application-level `route_prefix` to the route prefix of the ingress deployment in the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If you haven't already, set the application-level `route_prefix` to the route prefix of the ingress deployment in the application. By default, the `route_prefix` is `/`.
```

> * When needed, add more applications!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When needed, add more applications.
```

For more details on the multi-application config format, see the documentation for [`ServeDeploySchema`](serve-rest-api-config-schema).

:::{note} 

> It is required to remove `host` and `port` from the application entry. Within a multi-application config, specifying cluster-level options within an individual application doesn't make sense, and is thus not allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You. must remove `host` and `port` from the application entry. In a multi-application config, specifying cluster-level options within an individual application isn't applicable, and is not supported.
```

# Deploying Multiple Serve Applications

In Ray 2.4+, deploying multiple independent Serve applications is supported. This user guide walks through how to generate a multi-application config file and deploy it using the Serve CLI, and monitor your applications using the CLI and the Ray Serve dashboard.

## When to Use Multiple Applications

> It can be useful to deploy multiple independent applications on one Ray cluster. However, it is also important to keep in mind the downsides of doing so.

Reviewer 3: It's not very clear what the downsides are. eg. what would the competition for resources lead to?

What are the main reasons we would not want people to use multi-app?

Author: Added a part talking about starvation of resources. Got approval from @akshay-anyscale offline.

@edoakes @sihanwang41 Could you also take a look at this section? I wrote this based off of my understanding, I think it'd be helpful to get your guys' input as well. This is going to be at the top of the page.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to directly remove the downside part. 
The downside mentioned here is not very clear for user to decide whether to use single app or multi-app. 
- Sharing resource is very vague topic. (e.g. there might be also latency wise perspective to consider, it is more case by case.)
- Isolation can be achieved by setting up some resource tags within one cluster with different nodes.
These trade offs might be better fit for user case blog stuff :).
For day1 user, I am concerned it will cause some confusion.

Author: Resolved offline.

:start-after: __serve_example_begin__
:end-before: __serve_example_end__
```

Copy this to a file named `calculator.py`.

Define a second Serve application:
```{literalinclude} doc_code/basic_greet.py
:language: python
:start-after: __serve_example_begin__
:end-before: __serve_example_end__
```
Copy this to a file named `greet.py`.

Generate a multi-application config file that contains both of these two applications and save it to `config.yaml`.

```
serve build --multi-app calculator:app greet:app -o config.yaml
```

This generates the following config:
```yaml
proxy_location: EveryNode
http_options:
  host: 0.0.0.0
  port: 8000

applications:

- name: app1
  route_prefix: /calculator
  import_path: calculator:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: Multiplier
  - name: Adder
  - name: Router
  - name: DAGDriver

- name: app2
  route_prefix: /greet
  import_path: greet:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: greet
  - name: DAGDriver
```

:::{note} 
The names for each application are auto-generated as `app1`, `app2`, etc. To give custom names to the applications, modify the config file before moving on to the next step.
:::

### Deploy the Applications

> To deploy the applications, be sure to start a Ray cluster first.

Reviewer 3: Should we add the serve run example here too?

Author: Added a section on easy development with `serve run`

  import_path: greet:app
  runtime_env: {}
  deployments:
  - name: greet
  - name: DAGDriver
```

(serve-config-migration)=
### Migrating from a Single-Application Config

Migrating the single-application config `ServeApplicationSchema` to the multi-application config format `ServeDeploySchema` is straightforward. Each entry under the  `applications` field matches the old, single-application config format. To convert a single-application config to the multi-application config format:
* Copy the entire old config to an entry under the `applications` field.
* Remove `host` and `port` from the entry and move them under the `http_options` field.
* Name the application.
* If you haven't already, set the application-level `route_prefix` to the route prefix of the ingress deployment in the application.
* When needed, add more applications.

For more details on the multi-application config format, see the documentation for [`ServeDeploySchema`](serve-rest-api-config-schema).

:::{note} 
You must remove `host` and `port` from the application entry. In a multi-application config, specifying cluster-level options within an individual application isn't applicable, and is not supported.
:::

> ## One application vs Multiple Applications

Reviewer 3: Imo this should be at the top of the page "When to use multiple applications"

Author: Moved and renamed!

It can be useful to deploy multiple independent applications on one Ray cluster. However, it is also important to keep in mind the downsides of doing so.

We suggest you deploy multiple applications per cluster if:
* You want to save cost by sharing resources between applications.
* You have many small independent models, and you want to be able to easily add and delete models often.

However, we suggest you limit to one application per cluster if:
* Your applications are large and require a lot of resources. Deploying multiple applications per cluster can cause competition of resources in this case.

> * You want better isolation between applications. Although applications are independent of one another, isolation can't be guaranteed. Also, if you need to change the configuration of the cluster for one application, all other applications will also be affected. 

Reviewer 3: I think it would be helpful to add a section on how deployments will work for adding/removing/updating applications
